# Glossing-Matthew
This project, “Digitized Medieval Glosses on the Gospel of Matthew,” constitutes a pilot program with development of two digital humanities (DH) programs: (1) a research and data-management tool that can organize the vast data pertaining to manuscript glosses, and (2) a platform for annotating glosses and visualizing them in a digital edition to be presented as an interactive web resource. “Glosses” are annotations that medieval thinkers reading a text would make in their manuscripts. Glosses ranged from short, one-word clarifications placed between the lines of text to lengthy paragraphs of commentary placed in the margins of the manuscript. They are scholars’ primary witness to both early and developed study, usage, and understanding of some of the most important texts in western medieval society. The pilot program will utilize glosses from 20-25 12<sup>th</sup>-century manuscripts on one chapter of the Gospel of Matthew, Matthew 5. Traditionally, scholarship has ignored the diversity and breadth of glosses on key texts in favor of studying what is more readily available in early printed editions, namely the final standardized form of the glosses, which came to be known as the *Ordinary Gloss*. This means that the interpretive voices of dozens, if not hundreds, of medieval thinkers on the Bible and on other texts, such as law collections, have been lost to history. If their gloss did not make it into the *Glossa ordinaria*, it is relegated to the margins, literally, of one or more manuscripts housed in European libraries.

The work of this test case will serve as a necessary foundation for completing a DH edition of the glosses on the Gospel of Matthew, and it will provide a test case that can then lead to extramural funding. The eventual vision through such funding is a large-scale, online “Gallery of Glosses” that will preserve thousands of scholarly glosses from medieval manuscripts on authoritative texts together with data about the manuscripts in which they are found. Such a gallery would vastly enhance our understanding of medieval theology, philosophy, law, methods of study, and roads of communication and transmission of knowledge.
